**ADOM**: Very successful sandbox overworld roguelike. Sense of
place.

**Avernum 6**: Single-scale sandbox map world.

**Baldur's Gate 2**: Wizard battles. Character build crunching. Best
CRPG ever.

**Betrayal at Krondor**: Great worldbuilding. Plotted, but much free
roaming.

**Brogue**: Rogue done right. Modern roguelike design. No-XP
character building. Polished UX.

**Cogmind**: UI and visual effects with minimalist graphics.

**Dark Souls**: Ambient worldbuilding. Sense of place. Vaguely
post-apocalyptic, few frindly NPCs to worry about.

**Disgaea**: Goes to 9999.

**Don't Starve**: Light matters, night on the outside is actually
dangerous.

**DoomRL**: No stairs up, no regenerating health.

**Dungeon Craft**: Fresh take on crunchy crawl gaming.

**Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup**: Current maximalist roguelike champion.
Character build crunching.

**Earthdawn**: Postapocalyptic fantasy.

**Elona**: Crazy stuff galore. Sandbox overworld roguelike.

**Eschalon**: CRPG with a roguelike single-character-single-turn
time model. Ended up a bit dull with few tactical options at times
though, what should be done better?

**Far Cry 3**: Industry standard AAA open-world game template: Map
revealing and clearing metagame, lair-cleaning missions,
miscellaneous collectibles, open-world respawning, instanced quests
and character building with a skill tree and a shallow power curve.
Probably not the best way to go about all of the things, but
certainly something to be aware of.

**Legend of Zelda**: Making overland and dungeon crawling compelling
without any RPG stat cruft.

**Lords of Chaos**: [Visual style](lords_of_chaos.png). Turn-based
indoor/outdoor exploration. Wizard battles.

**Lords of Midnight**: Minimalist moody worldbuilding.

**Might & Magic**: Monty haul cheese done right.

**Nahlakh**: Tactically crunchy fantasy sandbox, does a lot with
little.

**NetHack**: Goes overboard with disjoint gimmicks, but a few
disjoint gimmicks can be great.

**Pool of Radiance**: Early questing sandbox game done right.

**Sil**: Angband done right. Modern roguelike design. Focused
flavor.

**Skyrim**: State of the art AAA fantasy sandbox. The world leveling
up with the character is a problem.

**Temple of Elemental Evil**: Megadungeon world.

**Thief**: Great worldbuilding. Creepy places. Fragile protagonist.

**Titan Quest**: Set in antiquity. Road trip overworld. AAA topdown
UX.

**Tome4**: Overworld roguelike, very popular.

**Ultima Underworld**: Megadungeon world. Worldbuilding with
ecosystem.

**Ultima V**: [Visual style](ultima_v.png). Worldbuilding. Dangerous
underworld.
